
HPG-Methyl
==========

HPG-Methyl is an ultrafast and highly sensitive Next-Generation Sequencing (NGS) read mapper and methylation context extractor. Compared with other current mapping and methylation extraction tools, HPG-Methyl offers better sensitivity and shorter execution times even for long reads.

Since the files generated by HPG-Methyl are fully compatible with the files generated by other popular tools, it can be used as a drop-in replacement to accelerate existing methylation analysis pipelines.

This read-me file contains a short guide to get started quickly with HPG-Methyl. Check the [manual pages](/man) for more information about building, debugging, extending and using the software.

There are a compresed executable that runs, as is, under ubuntu 14.04, 16.04 and 18.04 versions. This compiled file is available at [releases page](../../releases).



# Building

HPG-Methyl requires a working installation of GCC 4.9.2+, SCons and the following packages:

| Library | Ubuntu / Debian | Red Hat / Fedora / Centos |
|:-------:|:---------------:|:-------------------------:|
| GNU C Toolchain     | build-essential | make / automake / gcc |
| SConstruct    | scons      | scons                    |
| ZLib    | zlib1g-dev      | zlib-devel                |
| Curl    | libcurl4-gnutls-dev | libcurl-devel         |
| libxml  | libxml2-dev     | libxml2-devel             |
| ncurses | libncurses5-dev | ncurses-devel             |
| GNU GSL | libgsl0-dev     | gsl-devel                 |
| check   | check           | check-devel               |

If the distribution and release of the OS is Ubuntu 18.04, please, take a look at Issues section before compile.

When all the packages are installed, build a release executable with:

```
$ scons
```

Or a debug executable with:

```
$ scons debug=1
```

The binary will be created on the /bin directory.


# Running

To run HPG-Methyl, first the BWT index must be created. This process must be done only once per reference genome, using a FASTA reference genome file:

```
$ hpg-methyl build-index -g <your-fasta-file> -i <index-output-directory> -r 10 --bs-index
```

When the BWT index building has finished, HPG-Methyl can be used to map reads from a FASTQ file:

```
$ hpg-methyl bs -i <index-directory> -f <fastq-file-path> -o <output-directory> --cpu-threads <thread-count>
```

Or to map the reads and extract the methylation context status simultaneously:

```
$ hpg-methyl bs -i <index-directory> -f <fastq-file-path> -o <output-directory> --cpu-threads <thread-count> --write-mcontext
```



# Example datasets

In order to test the application, the following public datasets are available on
the GREV's external SFTP server.

The login details are:

* **Username**: `anonymous`
* **Password**: `anonymous`
* **Hostname**: `clariano.uv.es`

## Reference genome

* Homo sapiens GRCh37 reference genome: `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/Homo_sapiens.GRCh37.68.dna.fa`

## Real bisulphite treated sequences

* SRR309230 (75 nt, 15 million samples): `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/real/SRR309230_1_075nt_15M.fastq`
* SRR837425 (100 nt, 15 million samples): `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/real/SRR837425_1_100nt_15M.fastq`

## Synthethic bisulphite treated sequences

* 100 nt, 4 million samples: `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/synthethic/test_4M_100nt_n3_r010.bwa.read1.fastq_convert.fastq`
* 150 nt, 4 million samples: `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/synthethic/test_4M_150nt_n3_r010.bwa.read1.fastq_convert.fastq`
* 400 nt, 4 million samples: `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/synthethic/test_4M_400nt_n3_r010.bwa.read1.fastq_convert.fastq`
* 800 nt, 4 million samples: `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/synthethic/test_4M_800nt_n3_r010.bwa.read1.fastq_convert.fastq`
* 1600 nt, 4 million samples: `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/synthethic/test_4M_1600nt_n3_r010.bwa.read1.fastq_convert.fastq`
* 3200 nt, 4 million samples: `sftp://anonymous@clariano.uv.es/datasets/synthethic/test_4M_3200nt_n3_r010.bwa.read1.fastq_convert.fastq`

# License

HPG-Methyl is free software and licensed under the GNU General Public License version 2. Check the [COPYING](/COPYING) file for more information.

# Issues

Firstly, check the distibution and release of the Operating System:

```
$ lsb_release -a
```

If the OS is Ubuntu 18.04, some changes are needed to compile properly:

In the file [lib/third_party/config/libconfig.c](src/pair_server.h#L37), the line 37 must be commented

```
37 //#include <xlocale.h>
```

In the file [lib/c/src/aligners/bwt/BW_preprocess.h](lib/c/src/aligners/bwt/BW_preprocess.h#L45), the lines 45, 46, 49 and 50 must be commented

```
45 //#ifdef __GNUC__
46 //#ifdef __NO_INLINE__
 ...
49 //#endif
50 //#endif
```

And in the file [src/pair_server.h](src/pair_server.h#L60) the lines 60, 61, 68 y 69 must be commented

```
60 //#ifdef __GNUC__
61 //#ifdef __NO_INLINE__
 ...
68 //#endif
69 //#endif
```
Finally, it can compile following the steps showed at Building section.

# Contact

Contact any of the following developers for any enquiry:

* Juanma Orduña ([juan.orduna@uv.es](mailto:juan.orduna@uv.es)).
* Mariano Pérez ([mariano.perez@uv.es](mailto:mariano.perez@uv.es)).
* Ricardo Olanda ([ricardo.olanda@uv.es](mailto:ricardo.olanda@uv.es)).
* César González ([cesar.gonzalez-segura@uv.es](mailto:cesar.gonzalez-segura@uv.es)).

